- Hey YouTube, hey Peter.
- Hi Michael, thanks for inviting me to your podcast.
- Yeah, absolutely.
I'm so happy to have you first here on the channel
here at YouTube and of course on the podcast.
So if you're listening live,
give us some comments and feedback.
I can already see a pre-question has been posted here
in the live chat, so we'll try to get to that.
If you're watching the replay, thanks for watching.
All right, ready to kick this off?
- Yeah.
- All right, Fyodor, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
- Thanks.
So I'm Fyodor Fitsner, I'm working on this flat project.
- So excited about your project.
- Well, I'm excited as well.
It's something new, yeah, it's open source,
I love open source, and it's actually,
this project is a spin-off.
you know, it's like a second iteration.
Yeah, because I started...
Yeah, yeah.
You had a project called...
What was it called?
It's called Pagelet, right?
Is that what you're referring to?
So yeah, it was Pagelet.
So we started as an internal tool for making quick apps,
you know, like throwaway apps.
And it was for web mostly.
So it's like, it started like as a web thing.
And yeah, it was PageLab.
Then I shortened the name to PGLab.
And some guy on Hacker News said
that it's probably about like Polgram,
something like, or PostgresQL.
Yeah, so I got confused.
and I started calling it like BeGlad.
So I didn't like the name and I didn't like that it's only web.
>> Yeah.
>> Because the next step right after web,
I started looking into doing desktop apps with this stuff,
and realized that actually the only choice is using WebView.
And WebView is really platform specific.
So on macOS is one thing, it's like Safari.
On Windows is like either like WebView 1, WebView 2,
which is quite a separate level, et cetera, et cetera.
So I-
- A lot of times they don't have like full support
for modern HTML as well.
So certain things you do might act janky
on a certain version of an OS.
Yeah, it's always a weird, weird thing, isn't it?
Yeah, so yeah, this page lab was made on React
and I realized pretty quickly that you cannot open it like right away
in a web view on Windows because it's this, you know, Microsoft Edge browser
so you have to add some like polyfills, etc. to make it work on Windows, so yeah.
So then I don't remember the exact moment, but probably I saw like an announcement from Google
that they're releasing this like Flutter something like into production for web and desktop.
Yes.
And I become interested, you know, what is that, you know, like, and they're looking to like
Flutter thing, you know, and I realized actually that it was,
it's been on the market like for a long time and mostly useful
for, yeah, for mobile apps.
And I'd always kind of just dismissed Dart as just, you
know, kind of like a weird CoffeeScript type of thing.
It's like, oh, just another language to program to write
JavaScript. Boring. But then when Flutter came around, it
it got way more interesting.
So before we dive into what Flutter is
and how we work with it and why you built it and so on,
let's actually take a bit of a step back.
And let's actually talk about the two building blocks,
or one of the building blocks.
We have Dart, the programming language,
which has been around since 2011 or so.
And then we have Flutter, the UI framework
that traditionally or normally you would use with Dart
to build initially,
I think it was just initially web apps, wasn't it?
- Yeah. - And then they added mobile,
and then they added desktop,
and the combination of those three things is fantastic.
- Exactly.
- All right, we'll start with Dart.
Tell people about Dart.
I'm not a super expert in it,
but I have been experimenting to see
whether using Dart and Flutter might be the right way
to rebuild the Talk Python Training mobile apps
because they're okay now, they have bugs.
There's a whole story about the App Store
about why they're not fixed as part of the problem,
not just the way that they're written.
But I would really like to modernize them
and I'm thinking that Flutter is the way to go.
So I'm personally interested,
but not very experienced in it.
But I've done a little bit.
So that's the perspective I'm coming at this with.
Tell us maybe about your background with it as well
and then we'll talk a tad about Dart and Flutter
before we get into the Python side.
- Sure.
So I have to say I'm coming from Microsoft world, .NET.
I've been in .NET like since the earliest bettas, you know?
So I grew up--
- Since like the year 2001 or something, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
We were going through the language specifications
sent to us by Microsoft, you know, like in the Microsoft Word file.
So at that time.
So, web then...
I'm a JavaScript guy, of course.
Yeah, and then I learned like anyone else, like TypeScript.
And then Flutter.
So my impressions about Dart
are very, very positive, you know.
It's so nice. I mean, maybe it's me, but it looks and it feels better than TypeScript.
Like to me, maybe it's because they have a great tool in Visual Studio Code, maybe.
But it felt so natural to write something in Dart.
And especially I love this like, this sound references, you know, like where you can have basically nulls.
You know, it's a really, like, huge problem, like,
like this nulls or nils or like...
like...
So, yeah, Rust...
like, deals with that, you know, there are no nulls, you know.
Go, somewhere like in between, so, you know, this flat server is written in Go and
In Go, you can have like, like new strings, but you can have new references like new references.
But Dart is great by default, it doesn't allow news and it, you know, it makes your app working
as expected, you know, and,
And for people who don't know, Dart is out in the audience, Tushar puts it as a modern
language, which is the mix of the good parts of JavaScript and Java.
I would say, yeah, it feels a bit like Java,
a bit like C# in its syntax and the way that it works.
Also a little bit like Swift with its optional,
like explicit optional type system.
It's kind of a mix of all the stuff
that was either in those languages
or came out in Swift later.
And it's a pretty nice language.
It's really different than Python.
- Oh, well, yeah.
- Especially untyped Python, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, yeah, so Dart, I mean, yeah, you can see all different things
in Dart, like TypeScript, you know, like C#, yeah, yeah, I agree, but it's so, I mean,
I would love to see many things like implemented in Dart, like transferred to JavaScript, but
of TypeScript, you know, like it's pretty, it's pretty,
it's pretty easy to write.
Yeah.
- It is.
- Yeah.
- Before we, if people who are listening,
we might not want to scare them away thinking
they would have to learn Dart in order to do this, right?
The whole project that you are working on is sort of a,
well, what if we used Python instead of Dart,
but we still kind of use the building blocks of Flutter,
which I think we should probably discuss as well,
'cause it's a unique way of programming, yeah?
Absolutely, yeah.
So, the problem is not in Dart itself.
Dart is a great language.
I mean, you can spend like a few days and pick up like basic things
and like you become really decent and write that.
The Dart is not the problem.
The problem is in Flutter, you know?
I mean, it's a great framework.
It's so flexible.
It's so powerful.
But it could be kind of like, you know, a steep learning curve, you know, like it's,
I would compare Flutter to React.
So if you're coming from React, it could be easier to do, you know, to...
Yeah, React Native, yeah.
So yeah, you know what, I, again, as a guy coming from like .NET world,
I remember those times when we were writing apps using like ASP.NET web forms, you know,
stateful controls, sessions, you know, on server side. And now we translated to these stateless
apps, like single page applications, you know, where the UI is built of like application state.
And to my mind, like this application state,
managing application state, like mutating application state,
you know, like it is the most challenging thing, you know?
It is.
It's all right for a simple Hello World apps,
but if you write something really complex,
you know, there are a lot of tons of libraries, you know, like Redux,
like probably the most probable, like there is block for Flutter,
So it's a really challenging problem, you know.
Yeah, I've been working, like I said, I've been exploring and trying to learn some Flutter
to see if it makes sense to work with.
And the state stuff about it is crazy.
It's really difficult to figure out kind of where does this fit in my application code?
Yeah, yeah.
Sometimes you just want to take, you know, something and write like a simple app, you
you know, like, don't bother with this state, you know?
Yeah, it could be really challenging.
There are a lot of questions, why would my...
if we're talking about React, like, tree re-renders
all the time, you know, like, what's going on?
Is it alright to use this or that? So, it's
kind of... if you look at any...
even trivial app in React or Flutter,
it's pretty complex right away.
We're not talking about backend because you have to
fetch data, synchronize data with the database on the server side.
It adds even more complexity like having a backend.
So yeah, it's still...
- For sure, you got to create all the APIs
and then you somehow got to keep them in sync.
Then you've got to do security
from the front end to the backend.
And there's a whole bunch of stuff.
So just having a single app that just has all your code,
all your state running is really convenient.
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I don't remember exactly when we transitioned,
like we developers transitioned to that,
like a common concept, you know, like that those apps should be made like
of like front-end and back-end, you know, it should be like... So we abandoned the idea of monolith
or like maybe because they're not scaled well, you know, but you know what actually the idea behind
like flat. So we're not trying to pursue like a framework for building apps serving millions of users.
So if you're building a line of business app and you have a huge developer's team,
maybe you don't need that framework. But if you're doing something small to serve hundreds
like of users, you know, like it's all right to assume
that you can eat memory, you can be a little bit slower here,
you know, like, so you can lose a little bit
your requirements, you know?
- Yeah, and I think it's probably worth just taking
a step back just for a second and talking about Flutter
and how it runs, because while some of these things
you're saying are true, a lot of this would be running
on the client side, so that's fine,
it's running on the desktop app,
running in your web browser but as a sort of a front end type of thing or whatever,
right? It's not so server focused.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. If it's, you know, it depends on the application. Exactly. So if you write
in the game, like, let's say, yeah, it's all about it's everything is running on the client,
right? So but most of like business applications, or like, you know, like, I don't know, like
admin panels or tooling.
Yeah.
I just need a dashboard that shows me the recent orders and I need to click them off
to turn them to say we've finished them or they're pending or like that.
It doesn't have to be Netflix level of design.
You just want something quick and get it up and share it, right?
Yeah.
And these apps, if you look into these apps, like every click on a UI, actually it's a
call to a backend.
So yeah, if you write something that can work on a mobile, like on a desktop, yeah, it's
a standalone app.
Maybe it requires some service like for authentication, but if it's mostly a standalone app, yeah,
you don't need backend and Flutter is great, etc.
So if you look, for people who are listening, if you go to flutter.dev, you can see some
of the apps that are in the App Store with Flutter.
And there's some really nice ones here.
You've got the BMW car app, you've got Stadia, you've got whatever the heck it's called Google
Pay.
There's a showcase you can go and they actually talk about the different apps that are up
here.
Google Pay, ByteDance, eBay, iRobot, like there's legit...
- iRobot.
- Yeah, iRobot.
- I got this app.
- I got this, yeah, boy.
- Rive, there's a question in the comments,
but we'll get to in a minute about that, actually.
Bunch of apps, and then you can also go and see
that there's a thing called, it's all widgets.
As you'll see, the way in which you design these apps
is code first, and you create these things called widgets.
You have some interesting ideas around that, Fedora.
But yeah, you can flip through,
and there's just tons of apps.
So here, at least the ones people submitted,
there's like 3,000 apps in this showcase, which, you know.
So it's a pretty well used project, right?
So we have Flutter, and it's not like React Native
or something where it puts HTML into your code,
but it kind of is powered on top of the HTML engines.
It runs by using an HTML canvas,
but then it just completely does its own rendering to that,
like 120 frames a second type of render.
But the idea is it's supposed to be completely
in control of the pixels so that it looks,
pixel perfect across all the devices.
That's their selling point, and you can see how well they go.
But until recently, I thought the only way
to program that was Dart.
And then I learned about your project, Flet.
And I got to say, I'm not the only one who
thought it was pretty cool.
Out in the audience, we've got--
Abhay says, Fedora, I love you, man.
Thanks for creating Flet.
And then there's another--
Nice, thank you for your support.
(laughs)
- Yeah, there's another, you know,
biggest fan and so on.
So people definitely appreciate this project.
So what is the story?
You know, I gave my limited experience
with what Flutter by default is.
Oh, also we mentioned this,
but it's worth just emphasizing once again,
Flutter compiles to different targets.
Flutter runs as a JavaScript app on the browser,
but it compiles natively with a head-of-time compilation
to execute on the desktop and on mobile, right?
So it's not just running some sort of web-interpreted type
of thing, it's literally compiled in native code
on the other platforms, right?
- Yeah.
- So tell us about Flutter.
This F-L-E-T, the fastest way to build Flutter apps
in Python, so exciting.
What is this thing?
- So, all right.
I have to admit maybe the current title, a little bit clickbaity.
Yeah, because I was...
There's a whole thing about marketing open source projects and gaining momentum.
And, you know, I'm not going to hold it against you.
Yeah, I was thinking a lot about how would I tell people what I'm working on.
But heck, why not?
we maybe we're not building Flutter apps per se but we help to build your Flutter
apps what what what if that if it's if not Flutter apps so yeah I can say yes
we you can build Flutter app in Python and it's good you know like flat it's
not just about like reflecting all the widgets all the power available
and Flutter to Python space.
It's not.
In Flutter, we're trying to cater all these, to present all those widgets and their combinations
to Python users in a very digestible form, like Flutter.
Those widgets, they're very highly specialized in Flutter.
There is a widget for padding, there is a widget for opacity,
there is a widget for that.
So it's like, if you try to write something real,
you will get this ladder of widgets,
widgets and it could be really challenging to work with this letter.
Yeah, it is.
In fact, we, yeah, in fact, we're trying to combine some widgets, you know, like to flatten
this hierarchy, you know, to make people more productive, you know.
I've been trying to look around the Flutter site and I'm not doing very well while we're
talking.
For an example, but the way that you write code, the Dart code version and the Flutter
code version, the Python version, is some UI frameworks have kind of a designer, right?
Think Xcode and storyboards, think Visual Basic or Windows Forms or WPF, like where
you can see it and you can drag things around. Flutter is very code-focused on using these
widgets. So you might create a list tile and then you would have the contents equals a
a list of rows and the row object you're allocating
or creating there has like a list of things
that are buttons and it's just,
it's like very, you see almost the hierarchy
on the screen, right?
And in some sense, programming in Flet
feels a lot like that, right?
You could sort of see on the home screen
that there's this place where you're adding,
going to a page and adding a row,
which takes a list of icons and so on.
But it sounds to me like you've also done some work
to build larger building blocks than just that, right?
You call them components and not just widgets.
- Yeah, so, well, definitely to work with these frameworks,
you have to have a pretty good sense of balance,
you know, like imagination, you know,
like you put these controls and you have to imagine
like what would be like on the screen. And also, flutter has
like hot reload. So you can experiment with your first like,
and there is also a project flutter floor. I looked into
that project. And it's really nice. It's a new startup. Maybe
you can cover it. What's it called? flutter floor. It's like
web flutter floor like that. No, like flow like, Oh, I see flow
like that. It's like, yeah, like a footer flow. Okay. Yeah. Oh,
interesting. Okay. So these guys, so yeah, you can drag and
drop and they produce like a flutter like a, like a package,
you know, like, I see it's a UI designer, and it'll generate the
hierarchy of widget probably it writes the codes behind the
scene for you or something like that, right? Yeah. Okay. Wow.
We'll have something, you know, in in our roadmap as well. So we
we're gonna make something very similar but instead of like Flutter code it will
be generating like Python code so it's gonna be interesting as well so yeah and
components so we call them controls we call them controls people asking about
like why control like why not call them widgets I don't know I maybe I didn't
didn't use term widget a lot at the time like but it's historically maybe maybe
it's because of its kind of like from like desire to replicate the speed of
net web forms yeah yeah that was the terminology there sure yeah controls and
And WPF, you know, like Windows Presentation Foundation,
also like controls and Xamarin controls.
Yeah, so.
- You've been swimming in this terminology.
So here it is, right?
- So yeah, it's controls.
And again, it's not like one-to-one
like reflection of Flutter widgets.
We're trying to be creative.
So we're like
trying to have some
opinion, you know, like what
would we like to put into
control, so we don't want
them very generic.
We don't want them
very complex. So
so yeah. And actually it's
an interesting thing if we
if we talk
about like
paradigm, React and Flutter, they're like declarative style programming, you know?
And we are converting this back to imperative style.
So you can find an article on Flutter website, like, describing the differences and why it's
cool, you know, like to build UI from the state.
But we are like with flat, we are going back to imperative style, like Xamarin style.
Right.
Okay.
Where you change control properties, you know, and they have a state, you know.
Yeah.
You can say like a dot text equals type of model.
So let's actually, I think maybe the best way for us to understand this, there's a ton
of questions about how it runs.
Like does it transpiled?
It's a compile.
How's it?
But I think the best way for us to set the stage
for that discussion is let's talk through your tutorial, okay?
Because that'll cover a lot of the capabilities,
some of the programming model and so on.
And if people drop over to flit.dev/docs
and click on the tutorials,
you have the obligatory to-do app.
But the one that looks interesting to me is this calculator app, right?
Like here's something that looks...
It looks literally like the one that I have on my iPhone.
It boggles my mind that a trillion-dollar company
cannot put a calculator on their larger version of their iPhone.
So I can't say it looks like my iPad one,
but this would run on my iPad as well.
But this looks like something I would really like to interact with.
This is built with Flutter, running on Flutter with Python.
So let's go, and what's cool is you can find a live demo
Because Flutter has a single page app in the web.
It runs on iOS and Android.
It runs on the desktop.
So if I say 5 times 10, granted, it's a calculator.
But it's pretty neat.
And this is just one of the deploy targets, right?
So let's talk us through like how to, first thing,
I can pip install, do I have to have Flutter?
Do I have to do, there's like quite a series of steps
to set up your machine to be a Flutter dev machine.
It's gotta have like iOS simulators potentially
and the Flutter and Dart SDKs,
all of that's a prerequisite to this, right?
- Yeah, you know what?
Actually, it's also a huge obstacle.
Like if you wanna start doing Flutter,
It's like I have both like Windows and macOS machines.
- Same. - Like at work.
You have to install a lot of things
to start doing something like in the,
especially on macOS, it's Xcode,
you know, like something like,
I'm still trying to figure out the whole like,
bunch of tools you need.
Yeah, like for, especially for deployment, but here.
- So Flutter actually comes with this thing
called Flutter Doctor.
And I'll put up a screenshot of what I get when I run it.
I'm running it right now and it's still running.
There we go here, hold on.
I'll put this up so that people can see.
- Sure.
- Does it, it doesn't really wanna,
I just don't wanna load it, come on.
In order to share it, I gotta get it to come up.
There we go.
So I'll try to include a screenshot
or a link to this something.
But it's like, checks that Flutter is installed.
Check that the Android toolchain is installed.
check that Xcode is installed,
check that Chrome is there,
Android Studio, IntelliJ or VS Code,
that there's host development, like,
there's a bunch of steps to make all this happen, right?
So we still need to do this though, that's my question is,
I still need to go through the steps to generate
like the Flutter configuration on my machine.
- So I have to say you have ideally green list,
because I have some gaps,
like I didn't install like IntelliJ,
like a little something. So in flat, in flat. So this client part, like it's a Flutter
app which knows how to render let's say JSON tree like page or UI
representation in JSON format. So it knows how to render it and it has like a
a final functionality. So it's compiled, it's pre-compiled for all the platforms, like for
Windows, for Macs, and these executables, they're included into Python, like, wheels, you know.
So when you install Flutter, it basically downloads, like, as a part of a wheel, it downloads
Flutter Client, which is Flutter, like, compile Flutter app, and it downloads Flutter Server.
Oh, so I might not actually need to do this.
Well, yeah, you don't see it.
I mean, you can see it in logs,
or if you go and see site packages
of your Python installation,
you'll see all those executables.
Okay, interesting.
Yeah, that's why you need nothing, you know.
Oh, that's fantastic, yeah.
Yeah, it's for desktop, for web,
web like compiled Flutter web app is embedded into flat server.
So it's like it adds another two megabytes of to like executable itself.
But so yeah, we have embedded like web part and you don't log either Linux, Windows or
macOS client with your wheel.
Right.
Okay.
The wheel knows which platform it's being installed on.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Yeah, let me check how big this thing is.
I went through your example
and that we're gonna talk through
and I compiled it to a .app, a Mac.app application
and it's 38 megs.
That's seems totally reasonable for me
for the base runtime basically.
- Well, Michael, but oh yeah, you're on frozen.
You know, you were.
- I was, sorry.
I was just thinking about it. I was just thinking a lot.
That's all.
Yeah.
It's pretty...
Yeah, for macOS it's the biggest, you know, like...
Yeah, like you said, like 30 something.
Like for Windows it's probably the smallest size.
Maybe not.
Yeah, but when you compare that, say, to an Electron app.
An Electron app is very large compared to that.
And yeah, yeah, because it packages browsers.
So you have the same picture on all platforms, right?
So yeah, exactly.
Flutter is nice because like you said before,
it's the same rendering engine like on all platforms.
Like Skia, something like, and even on web, it's Canvas.
So you have the same picture on all platforms.
- Yeah, fantastic. - And this is nice.
- It is.
All right, let's talk through this example.
So pip install flut, that takes care of all of it.
I'm sorry, I derailed us talking about all the setup
of Flutter and Dart and all that.
And so in order to write code with this,
I don't wanna talk through too much code,
but I wanna give people a sense of what it feels like
to write code with this.
It feels like a very much like kind of a Python variation
with the difference that it's more imperative, as you said.
So we would say from flat import page and text,
and you have a main method that is past a page.
And then you just say, add text and you set the value.
You could set the background color and then say run.
And well, hello world, flat.
There you are, right?
But you have other controls, like you have elevated button
and then you have a bunch of layout.
I mean, you like you as the developer.
- Yeah, like row.
- Because Flutter provides a lot of these,
like it provides row and column and containers
and all of those things.
So you just have a way to talk to those from Python, right?
Yep.
How does that happen?
What's the interop layer between Flutter and Dart and Go and all those low-level aspects?
And then when I write Python code, how does that work?
It's a good question, right?
Because people are constantly asking about like, during APK, like all AP files from
from this stuff like and those are the compiled output for the what you ship to the App Store
for people who haven't done that.
Yeah, yeah.
So the way it works is the following in the middle of all these.
There is a web app basically like written in go in go land.
called flat server or flat d for short and it holds in memory this like current
state of the page you know like when you when you like from one side of this
server is language or like this Python library like basically when you when you
When you do this page.add,
it sends like a JSON basically to
this web server and updates the state.
>> When I do this, I'm working in Python and the result is to
send to build up this control structure,
this widget structure, and then it sends over
to this embedded web server that's native,
that says build this in Flutter now, right?
Exactly.
Okay.
So this Flutter client from other side, it connects to this server with web
sockets, so like in real time.
And there is like a bi-directional channel between like this server and the client.
When you push changes from the language to this server, it sends like, you know,
like a, an update to Flutter app.
And when you click something on Flutter in Flutter, you know, like you do some like type
text in the text box.
Some event is raised.
Yes, yes.
Back to server and server.
Rouse it back to Python code.
So yeah, it's like three components like client library in language right now is Python, server
and client.
So it's like three things.
So when I execute my Python code, is that running on full CPython or is that running
on some limited lesser thing?
Like do I have full access to all of Python?
Exactly.
And when we're talking about deployment of this stuff to mobile devices, on the first
stages we're gonna support this so-called like server driven UI approach
and yes your code runs by a real Python and you have access to all libraries
yeah because yeah if you if you decide to put this on a phone like Python there
there could be as you know there could be limitations right and and most of
those projects I went through Kyvee and the Beware project as well.
Yep, Beware, Kyvee. Those are both interesting.
They do an absolutely amazing job like by packaging Python for mobile devices but there are always like but you know like so
So mostly they encourage you to use like pure Python modules, right?
Because if you decide to use like modules with native libraries in them, you have to
make sure that those are compiled for ARM64 architectures, right?
Right, which gets really tricky.
Sort of related to that out in the audience, maybe the first question we'll take before
we get to some of the others is, can we use other Python packages with Flet?
Could we run machine learning code on the click of a button?
Asked Raul.
Yeah, yes, absolutely.
And the idea of Flare was not like to be a central part, like in your app,
but to be on the side, you know, like to add UI to your application.
So you can make your app live, you know, like...
And goal was, first of all, to add web-based UI.
So you can share your app with your colleagues, with your team, customers.
So yeah, absolutely, you can use any libraries.
But we lack some visualization controls yet,
compared to other tools like Streamlit, for example,
like for scientists, absolutely.
Or there is another project like DeerPiGui.
- DeerPi, yeah, DeerPiGui.
Yeah, I've had both of those groups on the show before.
- Yeah, which is amazing, like for very fast visualizations.
Flat wouldn't be there probably, like, you know.
- Right, right, right.
More of a building interactive applications, perhaps.
- The low latency, yeah.
- Yeah, let's see.
So I feel like we kind of answered this,
but I think it's also maybe worth pointing out.
I think Tushar asked,
is this a transpile to Dart project?
It sounds like definitely no, it runs in CPython
and it serializes the UI to this other part of its process.
- Yeah, there is no transpiling.
Yeah, and you know, I saw a lot of,
I know what people talking about,
I saw a lot of horrible implementations like transpiling Rust to Dart, Dart to Rust, Python to...
All these guys, I mean, it's going to be a fragile solution, unnatural, you know, to my mind.
Well, as soon as you say, "Well, can I use this library or that library?"
The answer almost always is no.
Right? If you're...
You think of something like Sculpt or Brython, which is like Python in the browser,
but transpiled the JavaScript, it's, well,
how do you use these other libraries?
Like, there's no way to really--
- You will hit the wall.
You will hit the wall at some point, you know?
So if I were like an engineering manager,
I would never go for that, you know,
like in a real project.
- Yeah, yeah.
Except for maybe some real special tools or use cases,
but yeah.
All right, moving on down the line of our tutorial here,
one of the things that you have to keep in mind
and focus on when you're working with Flutter in general
and Flutter with Python is how do you build out these layouts
and how do you position the controls?
And it looks like if you know one,
you kind of know the other pretty well.
So for example, here we're adding a row
whose control is like the output,
but then the next row is, you say,
the controls are the first row of buttons.
And then another row whose controls
are the next row of buttons.
And you just keep building this up
and you pretty quickly end up in something that looks
like it's kind of a real basic calculator app.
- Yeah.
- And then you get into containers, right?
Where you've got a container contains like a column
that has each row and you kind of like put it together
like this, right?
But I guess the question I wanted to ask you here
is how similar or different is this than Flutter?
It feels to me like it's pretty similar, at least in the zen of it.
Yeah.
Yep.
You know what?
So,
PageLit was based on Microsoft Fluent UI library and for making new layouts,
there was like stack.
So stack could be like horizontal or vertical.
And here we decided to do not bend Flutter into something else,
but go with the same terminology.
So stack is basically like a bunch of layers,
and we use row and column and all this stuff, you know.
And it feels good, you know, like row and columns inside,
like rather than having stack everywhere or like div,
if you will, like div and then add some like semantics
to div by classes, you know, like it's still horrible,
like div, div, div, div, div, div.
Here we have row, column, column, row, at least,
so you can, you know, like distinguish these,
like, you know, visually, so.
- Right, one of the benefits of structuring your code
like this, and you do touch on it in this tutorial,
is that you can build little reusable segments, right?
So for example, if you've got a row
that has a column of stuff
and then another row with more columns,
you could take that, just that column
or even build up just one row at a time
and put that into its own function or its own class
and then sort of include that
kind of in the control sense of the traditional,
you know, Visual Basic, Windows Forms,
like here's the, now I have a bigger thing to drag around,
but in this world, drag around is just like write code to create it
and put it in the right spot.
You know what?
I've been really amazed, because it works so good.
I understand the first question people ask,
how would I make my own like Flutter component?
But you know what? You can do these user controls
in uh in made of this uh primitives
flat provides and it works pretty well they're
isolated they can handle events inside them like if you put few of those user
controls like on a page in different places they
will be all behave like you know separately and it's so
nice i mean maybe it's side effect you know
I wasn't thinking about that while doing this stuff,
but it's so good.
So you can build--
- And can these controls, do they have their own state?
- Absolutely, yeah.
- Oh, that's awesome.
So you can have like put information about it
and need some buttons to interact with it.
They sort of keep track of just that little block, right?
- Even better, you know,
like it's whatever you do on flat UI,
it's getting persisted right away.
So whatever, let's say if you have a huge form
and you type something into this form
and you do refresh in your browser,
all the information will be there after refresh.
So it's like, I mean, yeah, it's so great.
- And for a desktop app, say if I close it
and open it again, will it remember?
- No, it depends.
So right now it's a standalone app
and when you open it again, it will load another instance of this flat server with a clean state.
Right, so it kind of loses the state, yeah.
Yeah, so but...
I suspect you have access to the file system somehow.
You could save it if you wrote the code to do it, right?
Sure, yeah, sure, yeah, yeah, we're gonna make it, yeah.
Since this is Python executing, could I do like SQLite and say SQLAlchemy
and figure out like I'll put the file in my users app you know data directory in
the profile. Absolutely right now we're working on the only more advanced example
with like using database I mean like not advanced like but with using the
database and also we're gonna add data table control for for working with
grease you know because it's missing right now yeah yeah related to that out
out in the audience, Raul, asks,
is the way it looks and feels, is this material UI?
Can we change the theme and styling?
I know in raw Flutter, you can have
buttons out of the material design
or you can have buttons out of, what should they call it?
They call it Darwin or whatever the iOS equivalent.
There's different places you get the buttons
to look different and what's the story around that?
- So, right, it's a good question.
Again, I came from Microsoft world
and there they have Fluent UI and it looks different.
And actually Flutter was my first experience
with material UI.
And you know what?
I see-- honestly, even compared to Fluent UI,
it's pretty solid.
And I would say they have a strong commitment
to this material UI strategy.
And it looks really nice.
You don't have to sell people what it is.
Like I would probably need to sell people Fluent UI,
but I don't need to sell people like this material UI.
It's nice right away.
It looks nice.
It looks really solid.
But for different styles, yes, you can style,
like there are limited styling features right now.
like in flat, but we're going to pull more.
And also we will be doing these adaptive controls.
- Oh, so if I run the app on windows,
it might look different than it might be material
versus over on it on macOS,
it'll be the, whatever the heck is the Darwin.
- Exactly, so I don't know.
Yeah, you can actually, I,
you can, I don't know how to share a link with you,
>> Yeah. There's a private chat here in the streaming.
>> I will show you how it might look like.
>> Oh, fantastic.
>> While you're looking at it, I just also want to point out for
event handling is a super important thing in UIs.
UIs are basically get the stuff on the screen and
start handling events and updating the UI accordingly.
In Flet, all you got to do is, for example,
for your button you say onClick
equals a function called buttonClicked,
and you get past the data
and you can also associate like here's the indicator or the data of the button
and when it's clicked, pass that over to it like, for example,
the action to take and those can even be lambda expressions, right?
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah.
If you manage to put it in the single line like, you know...
So lambdas in Python are limited somehow, you know, like...
Yeah. Oh, yeah, they're single line.
>> I use it a lot like print something as lambdas
in event handlers to see if it's being called.
>> Yeah.
>> So I drop you a link to Fluent UI.
>> It's a library for Flutter.
It's really cool and there is a web demo,
even like in the reason also like Flutter,
macOS, something like that.
>> All right.
drop me a link as well. So, and for mobile apps, we have a lot of controls like this
Cupertino library.
That's what it's called, Cupertino. Yes, not Darwin.
Yeah, right away. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I get it. I get it. For many users, it could be really inappropriate to see like a fluent
UI through, let's say toggle button on the iOS, you know?
- This is fantastic.
Yeah.
I mean, when you open an app and it clearly looks
like it doesn't belong in the platform,
you're like, hmm, this is weird.
What is this?
It just, it doesn't bring the right impression.
And this, I mean, the stuff that you're showing
on the screen, I will link to the examples.
Like I can be convinced this is a proper macOS app
as well as proper Android or whatever it is you're looking at, right?
Beautiful.
Well, if you like a specialist, you can definitely see some odds.
Yeah, yeah, you're like, oh, that button's not quite--
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Drawn, you know, like--
Right, the way Flutter works is it doesn't pull in the underlying window
widgets out of your OS.
It literally redraws them from scratch, but they try really
hard to make it look the same.
You know what, it's always a debate, you know, if you go somewhere like in Harken News, you
will have these debates, you know, what would be like, because React Native, it's about
like displaying native controls, right?
But is it a good thing?
Like when you precise design and I work with designers in big companies, like, it could
be a problem if you cannot deliver precise design.
This gives you more stability across platforms for your look and feel.
Question in the audience, which I think we're going to get to in a second.
Sugato, can you create mobile apps with Flet?
I don't know if this is on the roadmap or this is already ready.
We might have to save a bit of the conversation for the roadmap discussion.
So as requested multiple times by our users, I put this, I assembled this like mobile strategy.
If you, Michael, if you can open this in the blog, it's in the blog.
Ah, the blog.
Gotcha.
It's a blog, flat mobile strategy.
There you go.
Cool.
So yeah, definitely we, it's, it's not, it's not like we forgot about mobile devices.
quite the opposite where I'm always thinking about mobile experience, you
know, we are getting there, like maybe slowly but we're getting there and we
will be there. So we want to deliver not just, you know, like the way you can
build like APK, you know, we want to like enable developers, you know, like to
quickly test for example these like experiences on mobile devices because
you know it's it's a complex process you know like yeah like packaging and
and signing and publishing reviewing etc so it's and many companies they are
moving to this server driven approach like Airbnb like Lyft you know like
big players so they can bypass like app store reviews you know and push some new functionality
like right away from the web servers so we we're going to explore this approach first
and yeah definitely we will look into packaging everything into like mobile package like I mean
Python compiled for ARM64, this Go server compiled for ARM.
And so making this like a sandwich, working on mobile and packaging it and delivering to mobile.
It's like the last...
This is the biggest challenge for you all, right?
It's a challenge.
It's not quite there yet, right?
It's a challenge. Yeah, it requires you to be a low-level programmer, you know.
Yeah, and Sugato actually has a follow-up saying,
"Cool, PyTorch is trying to make model serving available with React,
and using Flet could be a very accessible alternative."
I will look into that, you know.
Yeah, that is interesting.
It's a fancy topic, right?
Yeah, so for now, out of the box, I can package this up as a desktop app or a mobile app.
And desktop means Linux, Windows, macOS.
So yeah, just to make it right, like you can package it like as a desktop app, Windows,
Linux, Mac, and there's a web app.
Yeah.
On the mobile experience, you can use it as Power PWA app.
Right.
So you package it as a mobile app and then you install that as a progressive web app
and then it's kind of good to go.
Yes.
Okay.
But not like a native mobile experience.
I'm working on it right now and there is a branch for that.
Okay.
Exciting.
and live real time, yeah.
- Yeah. - So yeah.
- Okay, fantastic.
Let's maybe do, let's see, where's my tutorial here.
So the very last thing,
there's some stuff we talked about the events.
You have in there, you talk about how to package it up
as an executable and basically that's PyInstaller.
And then you have it's steps on how to, you know,
package it up as a web app as well.
Cool.
So let me ask you, maybe I'll pull up the roadmap as,
put that as the background.
Is this ready for people to build apps with?
Like what's the state of Flet?
It's very exciting and it looks quite capable,
but should people be using it yet?
Should they be giving feedback or where are you with this?
- So as it's basically like a second iteration,
So we had this proof of concept like page lead as a proof of concept and this guy, it's still, yeah, despite it's like a second iteration, it's still 0.something.
So there could be, I don't expect any drastical changes into API, but there could be some breaking changes going forward.
But and also to have a complete feature, I would love to have like a mobile experience
to like to complete the cycle, you know, like web, desktop, mobile.
But in general, it's pretty ready to build like these apps where like apps it made for,
you know, like, like, yeah, we're talking about the forms over data, the little portals
and the dashboards that we talked about at the beginning, right?
Exactly. So I think it's pretty much ready for primetime.
Nice.
All modern software is beta, you know.
Yeah, so it's prime, you know.
It's always evolving.
What's the contributor story?
Are you open to having other people submit PRs
and help out with, say, tutorials and stuff?
Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. All people welcome.
Awesome.
And I know it's a challenge for some projects,
but I really want to spend time on that.
Working with people, writing guidelines, etc.
Establishing rules.
So, absolutely.
Because it's not an open source project if you're not accepting PRs.
Or if you don't work with people.
It's like published source version.
- For sure, yeah, exactly.
It's source open, not open source, that's right.
Let me put an idea out there.
You have two really great tutorials here.
Are you willing to accept more tutorials?
- Sure.
- So over on the flutter.dev/learn section,
they have some tutorials over here.
Maybe it would be fun if people could like try
to create the equivalent of these tutorials, but in flat, I don't know, that might be a
cool thing to create and see how they come out.
Yeah, yeah, it's a nice idea, but you know, maybe it's not even worth a separate tutorial.
Like in flat, it could be like a single page of code, you know.
Yeah, absolutely.
So when I look at this, this looks a lot like, you know, I'm looking at the Flutter.
This looks a lot like a Dart version of Flutter,
or Flutter looks like a Python version of this, right?
It has this same hierarchical code type of thing.
There are some differences, like we talked about,
like state and stuff, but it looks really, really similar.
So if I am a Flutter developer, how easy is it to go to Flutter?
And if I go to-- if I learn Flutter,
and like, I really need the true native version,
how easy is it to go to, like, pick up Dart
and then go to Flutter?
You know, if you already a Flutter developer, well, the only requirement there probably
is you should know Python, right?
Like at the moment.
>> Yeah, I'm assuming that you know Python.
Yeah, yeah, sure.
>> Yeah.
And I think it's pretty acceptable to write something in Flutter.
I especially love the idea of using Flutter as a prototyping thing.
you can easily do something.
It's so much easier.
People who have not tried to write in Dart.
I feel like I am constantly chasing what const means.
I didn't mean to double it up.
Constantly chasing const around.
I do not understand this language.
So you might have a class which you're passing as const
and you might need to take away that const,
but then it's required to have const in other places.
But then it like cascade.
It's just like, okay, there's like five places.
I got to either remove or add cons because I just want to change like this is driving
me insane and I don't see any of that in flat and it makes me happy.
It sounds like you've been on this as well Fedor.
Yeah, because maybe you're a perfectionist, you know, like
you're trying to avoid all those, you know, like warnings.
Yeah.
So yeah, it's a, so yeah.
Sorry, it makes me think like maybe you could build that stuff really quick because it's
you don't have to deal with all those little weird language edge cases.
Yeah, yeah, and I had a few customers, like users on Discord coming from Flutter world.
So yeah, and again, the way back to Flutter from flat is also possible. Why not? I mean,
I mean, if you grow up, grow out of this flat thing,
you need something really unique, like animations,
some weird transitions, so why not?
So you can go and learn Flutter
and dive into this world.
- Yeah, I think, I agree that they should be
pretty transferable.
Certainly knowing one will help you know the other.
no doubt about it. Absolutely. And the way you think is real similar. So John asks,
how do you handle Android and iOS permissions entitlements? It sounds like you're not quite
there yet, but maybe you have some ideas on where that might go. So as right now,
we actually, you know what, we are not like delivering this anywhere, like, but we already
building iOS and Android packages as part of our CI process.
So they're already there and they're already published into App Store,
ready to be like sent for review, you know.
So yeah, it is like...
- Do you just put the entitlement in that compilation target, basically?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So definitely if...
So yeah, all these permissions right now, they have to be put into this pre-compiled Flutter client,
like Flat Client app.
Or right now we're working on a Flutter widget.
So Flutter widget called Flat.
So you can embed Flutter experience into any existing Flutter app.
So that sounds like you're doing it in reverse.
So you would create a build a Flutter application, a native one, compile it,
but what you can do is you can create a section of your UI that is Flutter.
Yeah, exactly. Imagine you already have an app written in Flutter or
native app like in Kotlin,
you know, like for or Swift.
You can replace part of your app with
these like flat driven by server-side code written in Python.
>> Cool. In that scenario,
where does the Python run?
It runs on the server?
>> On the server, yeah.
>> Okay.
>> You can actually have in this app,
your mobile app deployed to client devices, you basically have to redeploy code, Python
code in the server to deliver new experience, new UI, new clicks, you know, like whatever.
>> I don't know how relevant this is, but it might be. Have you looked at PyScript?
>> Yeah, sure.
>> You know, if some of the challenges is like, well, how do I end up running the Python part?
you know, could you WebAssembly your Python in and get it native?
And get it locally like for offline version?
So yeah, people asking like, there are a lot of technologies right now, right?
Like, if we're talking about PyScript and WebAssembly, it makes sense for web apps, right?
You know what? And actually, Dart itself is being compiled.
Okay, right now it's only part, it's Kia engine is in WebAssembly,
but they have, Google have plans to compile Dart
Flutter apps into WebAssemblies as well.
So it makes sense for web.
For mobile, it should be native code.
Yeah.
So for mobile, it should be native code.
I'm not sure, maybe tomorrow we'll see some engines translating this WASM into native code.
If you could run WASM in your native application on iOS, then maybe this opens some kind of door.
But again, as far as I know, it's a really restrictive environment model.
Yes, yeah.
- Yeah, it's not the same as saying,
well, sure, you can use PyTorch or requests or whatever.
- Yep.
- Okay, well, Fedor, I think we're just,
I think we're out of time,
but I wanna congratulate you on a super interesting project.
It's really cool.
- Thank you, thank you very much.
- Yeah, you bet.
Now, before you get out of here,
you gotta answer the final two questions.
- Sure.
- If you're gonna write some Python code,
What editor do you use these days?
Nice.
I love Visual Studio Code, you know?
I mean, I would love-- some people
recommend trying PyCharm.
And I believe it's a really great idea.
Maybe I will look into that, especially if it's
free for open source projects.
But right now, it's VS Code.
Yeah, it's great.
I can tell you your calculator tutorial works all the way
through on PyCharm because I just did it right before our show.
So it's all good.
It's all good.
Now, also notable PyPI package, like obviously, Flut is a good one, but other libraries you
may have run across recently, like, oh, this is cool, people should know about.
Well, for me, it's a really challenging question because I'm a new guy to Biden and I don't
I don't have any really any like, like, very packages, you know?
Yeah.
We can throw flat out there.
How's that?
So yeah, maybe flat is nice.
It's not allowed.
You pip install it.
You can say that.
Yeah.
And you know, it's actually, it's non-trivial.
And I spent a lot of nights trying to put these wheels, right?
You know, like to include these binaries.
So it's pretty cool.
And I can, like, if you guys have some questions, like, how would you repackage those wheels
during the CI process?
So I would be really happy to share my experience, you know?
Because I learned a lot of packages in the internal structure to understand how it works.
you know, like, basically like zip files, you know, what's inside.
Awesome.
All right.
Well, final call to action.
People want to get started with flat, they want to build an app with it, or maybe even
contribute to it.
What do you tell them?
Absolutely go and try.
Hope on discord, you know, I'm always online.
Let me know what you like, what you didn't like.
We're always listening.
So indefinitely contributions are welcome.
So yeah.
Awesome.
And you at the bottom of the homepage of Flet.DEV, you've got a subscribe to our newsletter.
I guess people can get updates on the project if they want there, right?
Yeah.
I haven't sent anything there yet, but yeah.
All about building up the group of people who are interested in what you're doing.
All right.
So it's mostly Discord right now.
Yeah.
Got it.
So it's pretty active.
Yeah.
All right, well, once again, super exciting project.
I've ranted on this before,
having some kind of UI framework
that is really modern and fresh in Python
is super important.
Flutter is quite interesting in that space.
Having a very viable mobile story for Python,
also really interesting.
So as much as you bring those things forward,
more power to you, we love it.
- Yeah, sounds great.
- Yeah, thanks.
See you later. - Thank you, Michael.
- Yeah, bye-bye.
Thanks everyone for listening. - Bye.
- Bye.